Add UDF doc (#7841)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/udfs.md

---
title: "User-defined functions"

> description: "Learn how to define UDFs in your dbt projects."

Reviewer: I would add the full term to the description to help SEO 
```suggestion
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
```

id: "udfs"
---

> ## Overview

Reviewer: We try to avoid having back-to-back headers with no text in between, especially for the opening since the title will be the lead-in. You can remove the ## Overview header and go right into the description. 
```suggestion
```

User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions within the warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs enable reuse of code; however, unlike macros, you can define UDFs in languages other than SQL (for example, Python, Java, Scala) and you can use them in queries outside <Constant name="core" />.

> Note that only basic SQL UDFs are currently supported in <Constant name="core" />.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if there's a better way to phrase this, but it feels contradictory to the part that immediately precedes it, where we say that they can define UDFs in languages other than SQL.

<Constant name="core" /> creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

> ## Defining UDFs in dbt

Reviewer: dbt is used either as a catchall for all versions of dbt or specifically for cloud platform. Is this truly a Core only feature or can it be used in dbt platform as well? If "no" to the latter, then I'd suggest
```suggestion
## Defining UDFs in dbt Core
```

Otherwise we should remove the <Constant name="core" /> mentions from the text body

To define UDFs in <Constant name="core" />, refer to the following steps:

1. Create a SQL file under the `functions` directory. For example:
    <!--Please check if the sample is correct-->
    <File name='functions/is_positive_int.sql'>

    ```sql
    {{ config(
        database='udf_db'
    ) }}

    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    ```

    </File>

> 2. Define your argument, output types, properties, and configs in a corresponding YAML file.

Reviewer: To keep the formatting consistent between steps
```suggestion
2. Define your argument, output types, properties, and configs in a corresponding YAML file. For example:
```

>     For example:

Reviewer: See above
```suggestion
```

        arguments: 
            - name: a_string
                type: string
                description: The string that I want to check if it's representing a positive integer (like "10") 
        return_type: # required
            type: boolean # required
    ```
    </File>

    The rendered `CREATE` UDF statement depends on which adapter you’re using. For example:

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem value="Snowflake">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION my_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS (
    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    );
    ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="Redshift">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(s VARCHAR, n INTEGER)
    RETURNS VARCHAR
    IMMUTABLE
    AS $$ SELECT repeat(s, n); $$
    LANGUAGE SQL;
    ```
    </TabItem>
    </Tabs>
<!-- Are steps 3-4 now supported?-->
3. Reference the UDF in a model using the `{{ ref(…) }}` macro. For example:

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql
    select

    maybe_positive_int_column,
        {{ ref('is_positive_int') }}('maybe_positive_int_column')

    from {{ ref('a_model_i_like') }}
    ```
    </File>

4. Run `dbt compile`.

>     In the following example, the `{{ ref('is_positive_int') }}` is replaced by the UDF name `udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int`.

Reviewer: I'd move this up next to step 4 for consistency

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

<!--Confirm how users can get this feature-->
:::info Beta feature 
If you are interested in getting access to this feature, please contact us. 

> :::

Reviewer 2: In cloud, it's going to be, available. It won't be behind any feature flag. People can just start using it if they so desire. In OSS they'll have to install a beta version of dbt-core (e.g. `pip install dbt-core 1.11.0b2`). Even though in cloud it isn't behind a feature flag, the feature itself is considered beta at this point in time.

Author: @runleonarun We can include this in the Upgrade guide

User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions within the warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs enable reuse of code; however, unlike macros, you can define UDFs in languages other than SQL (for example, Python, Java, Scala) and you can use them in queries outside the <Constant name="dbt_platform" />.

Note that only basic SQL UDFs are currently supported in dbt.<!--Is this correct?-->

dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

## Supported adapters

UDFs are supported in the following adapters:

- BigQuery
- Snowflake

> - Redshift

Reviewer 2: And postgres! Though whether that is important to document 🤷🏻 don't know how many people use it in cloud

## Defining UDFs in dbt

To define UDFs in dbt, refer to the following steps:

1. Create a SQL file under the `functions` directory. For example:

    <File name='functions/is_positive_int.sql'>

    ```sql
    {{ config(
        database='udf_db'
    ) }}

    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    ```

    </File>

2. Define your argument, output types, properties, and configs in a corresponding YAML file. For example:

    <File name='functions/schema.yml'>

    ```yml
    functions:
      - name: is_positive_int # required
        description: My UDF that determines if a string represents a positive (+) integer # required
        config:
            schema: udf_schema
            database: udf_db
        arguments: 
            - name: a_string

>               type: string

Reviewer 2: It should be noted that although `arguments` is not required, if arguments are specified both the `name` and `data_type` for an argument is required.

              description: The string that I want to check if it's representing a positive integer (like "10") 
        return_type: # required

>             type: boolean # required

Reviewer 2: This is my fault in. I originally implemented them incorrectly, but they are now fixed
* `arguments > type` should actually be `arguments > data_type`
* `return_type` should be `returns`
* `return_type > type` should be `returns > data_type`

    ```
    </File>

    <Expandable alt_header="Supported UDF types">

    You can use these values for the `type` property when you define a function in a YAML file.

    - `scalar` - Returns a single value per row
    - `aggregate` - Returns a single value per group, aggregating several rows

>     - `table functions` - Returns a table result

Reviewer 2: These two are not yet supported. We have plans to, but at this point specifying them won't do what the user expects.

Author: Hid this section for now

    <br></br>
    For example:

    ```yml
    functions:
	  - name: string 
	    description: string
	    type: scalar # default value
    ```

    If not explicitly specified, the `type` property defaults to `scalar`.

    </Expandable>

    The rendered `CREATE` UDF statement depends on which adapter you’re using. For example:

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem value="Snowflake">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION my_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS (
    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    );
    ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="Redshift">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(s VARCHAR, n INTEGER)
    RETURNS VARCHAR

>     IMMUTABLE

Reviewer 2: In redshift for now it'll be `VOLATILE` instead of `IMMUTABLE`. We don't have the ability just yet to dynamically set the volatility. Thus for the time being, redshift is hard coded to `VOLATILE` as that is the safest option to set.

    AS $$ SELECT repeat(s, n); $$
    LANGUAGE SQL;
    ```
    </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

3. Reference the UDF in a model using the `{{ function(...) }}` macro. For example:

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql
    select

    maybe_positive_int_column,

>         {{ function('is_positive_int') }}('maybe_positive_int_column')

Reviewer 2: `('maybe_positive_int_column')` shouldn't be in single quotes here. That is, what we pass in to the function _is_ the column, not the name of the column as a string. That is, it should be `(maybe_positive_into_column)` instead.

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

:::info

> UDFs are not yet supported in the dbt Fusion engine.

Author: Added this note

Reviewer 2: _Yet_ is the keyword here, we're hoping to have this in by Monday though 🤞🏻

Reviewer 2: Fusion support is in canary. It should be available tomorrow to Fusion folks 🙂

:::

> User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions within the warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs enable reuse of code; however, unlike macros, you can define UDFs in languages other than SQL (for example, Python, Java, Scala) and you can use them in queries outside dbt.

Author: Is defining UDFs in other languages now supported?

Reviewer 2: Other languages are not supported at this point. We plan on adding python support, but that'll be a follow-up _after_ coalesce 🙂

Author: Revised this paragraph [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/7841/commits/3217713c0fd75f8fc87e2ab4b0522dec567e557a) to avoid confusion

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

:::info
UDFs are not yet supported in the dbt Fusion engine.
:::

> User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse. They run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt. Note that creating UDFs in other languages (for example, Python, Java, or Scala) is not yet supported. 

Author: Revised this paragraph

dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

> Only `scalar` functions are currently supported. The `scalar` UDF type returns a single value per row.

Reviewer 3: @luna-bianca  I wonder if we should have a limitations or "prerequisites" section to call out:
- Only scalar functions are currently supported (returns a single value per row)
- Creating UDFs in other languages (Python, Java, Scala) is not yet supported
- list of supported adapters

Author: Added a new Limitation section 👍

    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS (
    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    );
    ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="Redshift">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(s VARCHAR, n INTEGER)
    RETURNS VARCHAR
    VOLATILE
    AS $$ SELECT repeat(s, n); $$
    LANGUAGE SQL;
    ```
    </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

3. Reference the UDF in a model using the `{{ function(...) }}` macro. For example:

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql
    select

    maybe_positive_int_column,
        {{ function('is_positive_int') }}(maybe_positive_int_column)

    from {{ ref('a_model_i_like') }}
    ```
    </File>

4. Run `dbt compile`. In the following example, the `{{ function('is_positive_int') }}` is replaced by the UDF name `udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int`.

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql
    select

    maybe_positive_int_column,
	udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(maybe_positive_int_column) as is_positive

    from analytics.<dbt_schema>.a_model_i_like
    ```
    </File>

    In your DAG, there should be a dependency between `is_positive_int` → `my_model` and a UDF node is created from the SQL and YAML definitions.

> After defining a UDF, you can update the SQL file that contains its function body (`is_positive_int.sql` in this example). When you rebuild, your changes will be applied everywhere the UDF is referenced. 

Author: Added this sentence

> ## Using UDFs in unit tests

Author: Added this section

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

:::info
UDFs are not yet supported in the dbt Fusion engine.
:::

> User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse. They run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Reviewer 3: Changing user to you and wonder if we can add some more of the business value here. cc @QMalcolm @graciegoheen to check my technical accuracy.
```suggestion
User-defined functions (UDFs) enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt, such as BI tools, data science notebooks, and more. 

UDFs are particularly valuable for sharing logic across multiple tools, standardizing complex business calculations, improving performance for compute-intensive operations (since they're compiled and optimized by your warehouse's query engine), and version controlling custom logic within your dbt project.
```

Reviewer 2: The suggestion seems technically accurate 🙂

Reviewer 4: Looks good to me - my one suggestion would be to say "They are objects in the warehouse" instead of "They run natively in the warehouse"

dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

> ## Supported adapters

Reviewer 3: @luna-bianca @QMalcolm Are UDFs backwards compatible to previous Core versions? If not, we might want to add as a prereq.

Reviewer 2: UDFs are _not_ backwards compatible. That is in OSS, it's only available for `1.11+`. In cloud it's in beta for `latest`, it'll come to `compatible` and `extended` at a later date. _Defining_ UDFs _is_ backwards compatible as far as doing so won't _break_ earlier versions (they'll get ignored on parsing). However, using the `function` macro on earlier versions _will_ cause an error on earlier versions.

UDFs are supported in the following adapters:

> - BigQuery

Reviewer 3: We might add that it's on Core for local and dbt platform for all of these adapters. Maybe there's a better way than listing under each adapter?
```suggestion
- BigQuery 
  - <Constant name="core" /> local install
  - <Constant name="core" /> in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" />
```

Author: Addressed here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/7841/commits/2fba50931c7b40428ee2082b66bcdd6eb4b1a4a3

- Snowflake
- Redshift

> - Postgres (<Constant name="core" /> only)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Postgres
  - <Constant name="core" /> local install only
```

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

User-defined functions (UDFs) enable you to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse, but they are objects in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt, such as BI tools, data science notebooks, and more. 

UDFs are particularly valuable for sharing logic across multiple tools, standardizing complex business calculations, improving performance for compute-intensive operations (since they're compiled and optimized by your warehouse's query engine), and version controlling custom logic within your dbt project.

dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF is built in the warehouse before the model that references it.

## Prerequisites

> * Make sure you're using the dbt Fusion engine or dbt Core v1.11.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Make sure you're using dbt Core v1.11 or the dbt Fusion engine or Latest in the dbt platform.
```

> * Make sure you're using dbt Core v1.11 or the dbt Fusion engine or Latest in the dbt platform.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Make sure you're using dbt Fusion engine or Latest release track in the dbt Platform or dbt Core v1.11.
```

> * Make sure you're using dbt Fusion engine or Latest release track in the dbt Platform or dbt Core v1.11.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Make sure you're using dbt Platform's **Latest Fusion** or **Latest** [release track](/docs/dbt-versions/cloud-release-tracks) or dbt Core v1.11.
```

    <File name='functions/is_positive_int.sql'>

    ```sql

    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    ```

    </File>

2. Specify the function name and define the config, properties, return type, and optional arguments in a corresponding YAML file. For example:

    <File name='functions/schema.yml'>

    ```yml
    functions:
      - name: is_positive_int # required
        description: My UDF that determines if a string represents a positive (+) integer # required
        config:
          schema: udf_schema
          database: udf_db
        arguments: # optional
          - name: a_string # required if arguments is specified
            data_type: string # required if arguments is specified
            description: The string that I want to check if it's representing a positive integer (like "10") 
        returns: # required
          data_type: boolean # required
    ```
    </File>

    <!--other types not yet supported
    <Expandable alt_header="Supported UDF types">

    You can use these values for the `type` property when you define a function in a YAML file.

    - `scalar` - Returns a single value per row

>     - `aggregate` - Returns a single value per group, aggregating several rows
>     - `table` - Returns a table result
>     <br></br>
>     For example:
> 
>     ```yml
>     functions:
> 	  - name: string 
> 	    description: string
> 	    type: scalar # default value
>     ```
> 
>     If not explicitly specified, the `type` property defaults to `scalar`.
> 
>     </Expandable>
>     -->
>     
>     The rendered `CREATE` UDF statement depends on which adapter you’re using. For example:
> 
>     <Tabs>
> 
>     <TabItem value="Snowflake">
>     ```sql
>     CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
>     RETURNS BOOLEAN
>     AS (
>     REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
>     );
>     ```

Reviewer 2: Should update to:
```suggestion
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    LANGUAGE SQL
    AS $$
      REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    $$;
    ```
```

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

# User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

:::info
UDFs are not yet supported in the dbt Fusion engine.
:::

User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse. They run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

## Supported adapters

UDFs are supported in the following adapters:

<Tabs>

<TabItem value="core" label="dbt Core local install">

- BigQuery
- Snowflake
- Redshift

> - Postgres

Reviewer 2: Databricks is now also supported 🚀 
```suggestion
- Postgres
- Databricks
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value ="dbt platform" label ="dbt Core in the dbt platform">

- BigQuery
- Snowflake

> - Redshift

Reviewer 2: Databricks as well 🚀 
```suggestion
- Redshift
- Databricks
```

---
title: "User-defined functions"
description: "Learn how to add user-defined functions (UDFs) to your dbt projects."
id: "udfs"
---

> # User-defined functions <Lifecycle status="beta" />

Reviewer 4: must be on `1.11` or `latest` or `fusion` - do we want to call that out anywhere?

Reviewer 3: Yes! We should add a prereqs section.

Reviewer 3: Added prereqs [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/7841/commits/c0e13d022f620b81809b1e0ac2cce7829cd69278)

:::info
UDFs are not yet supported in the dbt Fusion engine.
:::

> User-defined functions (UDFs) enable users to define and register custom functions in your warehouse. Like [macros](/docs/build/jinja-macros), UDFs promote code reuse. They run natively in the warehouse so you can reuse the same logic in tools outside dbt.

Reviewer 4: eventually, we will also support UDAFs and UDTFs - not sure if we want to generally refer to these as "functions" or "UDFs"

Reviewer 3: Maybe functions in this intro paragraph, but going forward we frame it as "we have two kinds of UDFs: UDAFs and UDTFs"

> dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF file is created before building the model that references it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
dbt creates, updates, and renames UDFs as part of DAG execution. The UDF is built in the warehouse before the model that references it.
```

## Supported adapters

UDFs are supported in the following adapters:

<Tabs>

> <TabItem value="core" label="dbt Core local install">

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<TabItem value="core" label="dbt Core">
```

sounds like this is the list for Core - local and in the platform

- BigQuery
- Snowflake
- Redshift
- Postgres
- Databricks

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value ="dbt platform" label ="dbt Core in the dbt platform">

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<TabItem value ="fusion" label ="dbt Fusion">
```

sounds like this is the list for fusion - local and in the platform

- BigQuery
- Snowflake
- Redshift
- Databricks

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Defining UDFs in dbt

To define UDFs in dbt, refer to the following steps:

1. Create a SQL file under the `functions` directory. For example:

    <File name='functions/is_positive_int.sql'>

    ```sql
    {{ config(
        database='udf_db'

>     ) }}

Reviewer 4: this is duplicative of the database config in yml 

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: though maybe we want to callout that like models you can specify configs in the .sql file _or_ in yml?

    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    ```

    </File>

2. Specify the function name and define the config, properties, return type, and optional arguments in a corresponding YAML file. For example:

    <File name='functions/schema.yml'>

    ```yml
    functions:
      - name: is_positive_int # required
        description: My UDF that determines if a string represents a positive (+) integer # required
        config:
            schema: udf_schema

>             database: udf_db

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          schema: udf_schema
          database: udf_db
```

        arguments: # optional
            - name: a_string # required if arguments is specified
              data_type: string # required if arguments is specified

>               description: The string that I want to check if it's representing a positive integer (like "10") 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          - name: a_string # required if arguments is specified
            data_type: string # required if arguments is specified
            description: The string that I want to check if it's representing a positive integer (like "10") 
```

        returns: # required

>             data_type: boolean # required

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          data_type: boolean # required
```

    ```
    </File>

    <!--other types not yet supported
    <Expandable alt_header="Supported UDF types">

    You can use these values for the `type` property when you define a function in a YAML file.

    - `scalar` - Returns a single value per row
    - `aggregate` - Returns a single value per group, aggregating several rows

>     - `table functions` - Returns a table result

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - `table` - Returns a table result
```

Author: > 

Hi @graciegoheen , just to note, this expandable is currently hidden because `aggregate` and `table` types are not yet supported.

    <br></br>
    For example:

    ```yml
    functions:
	  - name: string 
	    description: string
	    type: scalar # default value
    ```

    If not explicitly specified, the `type` property defaults to `scalar`.

    </Expandable>
    -->
    
    The rendered `CREATE` UDF statement depends on which adapter you’re using. For example:

    <Tabs>

    <TabItem value="Snowflake">
    ```sql

>     CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION my_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)

Reviewer 4: from the yaml above, shouldn't this be:
```suggestion
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
```

    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS (
    REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    );
    ```
    </TabItem>

    <TabItem value="Redshift">
    ```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(s VARCHAR, n INTEGER)
    RETURNS VARCHAR
    VOLATILE
    AS $$ SELECT repeat(s, n); $$

>     LANGUAGE SQL;

Reviewer 4: @QMalcolm this doesn't look like the same function as the snowflake example!!

Reviewer 2: In redshift the end result will be
```sql
 CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(VARCHAR, INTEGER)
    RETURNS VARCHAR
    VOLATILE
    AS $$
      SELECT repeat($1, $2)
    $$
    LANGUAGE SQL;
```

Reviewer 2: If we want it to be the same function it'd beeee
```sql
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(VARCHAR)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    VOLATILE # Technically this function could be set as STABLE, but we don't support setting volatility yet
    AS $$
      REGEXP_CONTAINS($1, r'^[0-9]+$')
    $$ LANGUAGE SQL;
```

>     CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION repeat_n(s VARCHAR, n INTEGER)
>     RETURNS VARCHAR
>     VOLATILE
>     AS $$ SELECT repeat(s, n); $$
>     LANGUAGE SQL;

Reviewer 4: to take a guess at syntax looking at redshift [docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/redshift/latest/dg/r_CREATE_FUNCTION.html) (i HAVE NOT VALIDATED)

```suggestion
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    STABLE
    AS $$ SELECT REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$'); $$
    LANGUAGE SQL;
```

things i don't know:
- does redshift adapter automatically inject the `SELECT` or do you need to add that to the .sql file?
- i think volatility is stable for this example? though maybe it's `None` since we don't support `volatility` config yet?

Reviewer 4: do we want docs for `volatility` as well? 

`volatility` - “behavior of the function when returning results”:
- `deterministic` functions, like `substr(..)` return the same output for the same input.
- `stable` functions, like `now()` return the same output within one query execution.
- `non-deterministic` functions, like `first()`, might return a different output for the same input.

core issue here -> https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/12030

By default the volatility of a function is `None`

Reviewer 2: Volatility isn't set-able yet. It's hard coded in redshift because we have to supply a volitility redshift (it doesn't let you not)

    ```
    </TabItem>

>     </Tabs>

Reviewer 4: can we get examples of the syntax for the other supported warehouses as well please?

Reviewer 2: ### Postgres
```
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS $$
      REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    $$ LANGUAGE SQL;
```

Reviewer 2: ### BigQuery
```
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    AS (
      REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$')
    );
```

Reviewer 2: ### Databricks
```
    CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(a_string STRING)
    RETURNS BOOLEAN
    LANGUAGE SQL
    RETURN
      REGEXP_CONTAINS(a_string, r'^[0-9]+$');
```

3. Reference the UDF in a model using the `{{ function(...) }}` macro. For example:

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql
    select

>     maybe_positive_int_column,
>         {{ function('is_positive_int') }}(maybe_positive_int_column)
> 
>     from {{ ref('a_model_i_like') }}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    select
        maybe_positive_int_column,
        {{ function('is_positive_int') }}(maybe_positive_int_column)
    from {{ ref('a_model_i_like') }}
```

    ```
    </File>

4. Run `dbt compile`. In the following example, the `{{ function('is_positive_int') }}` is replaced by the UDF name `udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int`.

    <File name="models/my_model.sql">

    ```sql

>     select
> 
>     maybe_positive_int_column,
> 	udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(maybe_positive_int_column) as is_positive
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    select
        maybe_positive_int_column,
	    udf_db.udf_schema.is_positive_int(maybe_positive_int_column) as is_positive
```

>     from analytics.<dbt_schema>.a_model_i_like

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    from analytics.dbt_schema.a_model_i_like
```

    ```
    </File>

>     In your DAG, there should be a dependency between `is_positive_int` → `my_model` and a UDF node is created from the SQL and YAML definitions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    In your DAG, a UDF node is created from the SQL and YAML definitions, and there will be a dependency between `is_positive_int` → `my_model`.
```

>     In your DAG, there should be a dependency between `is_positive_int` → `my_model` and a UDF node is created from the SQL and YAML definitions.

Reviewer 4: do we have a screenshot of lineage we could add here? to show visualization of the DAG?

Reviewer 2: Here is a lineage example 
<img width="1464" height="903" alt="Screenshot 2025-10-06 at 20 36 16" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/04381137-71b7-4a92-8044-33abdd9d33d2" />

> After defining a UDF, you can update the SQL file that contains its function body (`is_positive_int.sql` in this example). When you rebuild, your changes will be applied everywhere the UDF is referenced. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After defining a UDF, if you update the SQL file that contains its function body (`is_positive_int.sql` in this example) or its configurations, your changes will be applied to the UDF in the warehouse next time you `build`. 
```

## Using UDFs in unit tests

You can use [unit tests](/docs/build/unit-tests) to validate models that reference UDFs. Before running unit tests, make sure the function exists in your warehouse. To ensure that the function exists for a unit test, run:

```bash

> dbt build --select "+my_model_to_test" --empty

Reviewer 4: @QMalcolm does `--empty` work with functions? that doesn't make sense to me

Reviewer 2: @graciegoheen Empty doesn't do _anything_ to functions. However, most unit tests also reference _other models_. For unit tests that depend on other models, the upstream models need to exists (so we can get some information about them). Because of that, we recommend `dbt run --select "+my_model_to_test" --empty` being run first so that the upsteam models exist (but aren't costly in insuring their existence). Doing the `build` in the documentation will also build the upstream models, and thus we should still recommend `--empty`

```

Following the example in [Defining UDFs in dbt](#defining-udfs-in-dbt), here's an example of a unit test that validates a model that calls a UDF:

<File name="tests/test_is_positive_int.yml">

```yml
unit_tests:
  - name: test_is_positive_int 
    description: "Check my is_positive_int logic captures edge cases"
    model: my_model
    given:
      - input: ref('a_model_i_like')
        rows:
          - { maybe_positive_int_column: 10 }
          - { maybe_positive_int_column: -4 }
          - { maybe_positive_int_column: +8 }
          - { maybe_positive_int_column: 1.0 }
    expect:
      rows:
        - { maybe_positive_int_column: 10,  is_positive: true }
        - { maybe_positive_int_column: -4,  is_positive: false }
        - { maybe_positive_int_column: +8,  is_positive: true }
        - { maybe_positive_int_column: 1.0, is_positive: true }
```
</File>

## Listing and selecting UDFs

> To list UDFs in your project, run `dbt list`. 

Reviewer 4: probably want to add a selector? otherwise `dbt list` will just list all nodes in your project

`dbt list --select "resource_type:function"`

> To select UDFs when running a project, use the following commands:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To select UDFs when building a project, use the following commands:
```

"run" is just for models :)

Reviewer 4: For the selector examples, we could just include the basic `dbt build --select "resource_type:functions"` and then put other selector examples here -> https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/node-selection/methods#resource_type

Author: > For the selector examples, we could just include the basic `dbt build --select "resource_type:functions"` and then put other selector examples here -> https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/node-selection/methods#resource_type

Updated the Node selector methods page [here](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/7841/files#diff-3310fdad7b8c50eb9157ee9c418dfda945b38b16b2721a97e167689cac1982e2)

> - `dbt run --resource_type function` &mdash; Use this command to only run UDFs in your project.
> - `dbt run --select resource_type:function` &mdash; Use this command to reinitialize all UDFs in your project.

Reviewer 4: @QMalcolm does both `--select resource_type:function` and `--resource_type function` work for `build`? i thought `--resource-type` was just for `list`?

https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/node-selection/methods#resource_type

```suggestion
- `dbt build --select "resource_type:function"` &mdash; Use this command to build all UDFs in your project.
```

Reviewer 2: `--resource-type` _does_ work for build 🤔 Just tested it both in cloud and in core. Of note the documentation says `--resource_type` and it should be `--resource-type`

> - `dbt run --select path/to/my_function.sql` &mdash; Use this command to select a function by file path.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dbt build --select path/to/my_function.sql` &mdash; Use this selector to build function by file path.
```

this is the same command - always `dbt build` - your examples are just of different selectors

> - `dbt run --select my_function` &mdash; Use this command if you modified a UDF and you want to replace it in the data warehouse. To update all models that use the UDF, run `dbt run --select my_function+`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dbt build --select my_function` &mdash; Use this selector to build `my_function`. To build all models that use the UDF, run `dbt build --select my_function+`.
```
